---
title: "From Fingerstyle to Prog Metal"
author: "Shiplet"
date: "TBD"
---

I've been playing guitar for close to 20 years now. I bought my first guitar, a Jasmine by Takamine, for $100 in January of 2002. I was in 8th grade, and had been asking for a guitar for months. At the time, I played alto sax in the symphonic and jazz bands, which was itself a dream I'd had since I was at least in 4th grade, but which ultimately struggled to hold up under the gravity-well that guitar would become in my life. 

One of my friends played bass guitar for the jazz band and I would spend every minute outside of rehearsal, not even playing it, just tuning it. There was something so deeply satisfying about hearing the notes come into tune and steadying that needle in the center of the tuner. I obviously cared that I couldn't actually _play_ the dang thing, but at the time, tuning it was enough. Barely.

It didn't take long for my interest in the saxophone to fade. I still kept up my knowledge and skills, was still a competitive little turd, insistent on being first chair, even if all I could think about was mastering every part of the Blink-182 song I was learning. At the urging of my band leader I even tried out for All State, but bombed so spectacularly that I can scarcely remember the experience happened at all. My parents definitely saw what was happening too, and as it has played out half a dozen times since then, they had to watch, helplessly, as one of their son's interests, which they'd poured money and years into, gradually faded into another interest, one in which they couldn't play _quite_ as big of a role.

Thinking back on it now, it makes sense why they refused to get me my first guitar. Why shouldn't they? They'd already invested so much in my training with the saxophone, had spent years listening to the persistent, unfocused honking that burped its way out of my room, purchased who knows how many pairs of black pants so I could perform in concerts where there was never a sure way to know if they actually heard _me_ playing, and not just the french horns or other saxes. If they bought me a guitar, then all those hours, days, years, dollars, music books, reeds, cleaning kits, ligatures, mouthpieces, and Steve Cole albums would go to waste in boxes under my bed, and they'd have to listen instead to Sum41 and Blink-182 and other pop punk bands with numbers in their names.

I asked for a guitar for Christmas and I asked for it for my birthday, but each time I got the same response: "There's no guarantee you'll stick with it. Why don't we get you something for your saxophone instead?" But I was determined. I knew that I'd get some money from my grandparents for Christmas and my birthday, and at that point I could do whatever I wanted. So it was with much gusto and defiance and self-consciousness that I asked my Nana to drive me to the music store so I could finally get my first acoustic guitar. This also happened to be the very first time that I had heard, in person, someone play a guitar really, really well. It was an experience that anyone who's walked into a Guitar Center will be familiar with: a guy, a guitar, and a distorted amp, shredding maniacally.

Combine that with the fact that one of my friends who, having only started playing a few months before me and could already play the solo from a Metallica song, told me directly that he thought I wouldn't make a good guitar player, and you've got my day-one fear that I'll never be as good as a "real" guitarist.

You know the type, the "real" guitarists: perpetually laid back, like The Dude, except they care A LOT about playing guitar _right_. They love to tell you about how A minor is a harmonic substitute for C major. They come from a blues or a folk or a jazz background, and one of their first lessons is to teach you that it doesn't matter how many notes you play or how quickly, but how you put them together. They've got guitars worth as much as used cars, and love to compliment you on your "box". "That's a good lookin' blues box you got there." "Check this box out - give the E a good hit and feel how it thumps you in the heart." It's hard to picture them doing anything _other_ than playing guitar.

All in all, they're good people. My friend was a jerk, but he'd only been playing for about 6 months and 8th-graders are generally awful to begin with. But "real" guitarists? I was terrified of them.

My first instructor was a fingerstylist. We had just moved to Pennsylvania from Florida, and as I was still in 8th grade and had no friends, I plunged myself into guitar, but I wasn't progressing as quickly as I would have liked. I was trying to learn Stairway to Heaven, but because I'd spent so much time with punk songs, I'd never encountered fingerpicking before. The idea that two notes could be played simultaneously, with 3 or 4 strings between them, to create a combined melody/harmony arrangement, was absolutely foreign to someone who had only ever played power chords with a constant downstroke.

When I said as much to my first instructor, he chuckled a bit. I don't remember exactly what he said, but I remember how it made me feel: I would have to put my trusted Tortex down and use each finger on my right hand as its own, independent, fleshy little pick. I immediately asked, "Do I have to grow out my fingernails? How will I play loud enough?" 

"Well, I think you'll find that most fingerstylists prefer the sound of the pad of the finger on the string, rather than fingernails or banjo-style finger picks. And you'll get louder as you get stronger, we'll work on that."

He had a plan for me - one that I had never anticipated. I walked into that little studio wanting to learn how to play _all_ of Stairway to Heaven - meaning, mainly, the solo! I wanted to sound like Jimmy Page on a $100 acoustic. But this guy - this real guitarist - was about to teach me one of the most important lessons I've ever learned.

I could say he taught me Travis Picking. Or that he taught me how to improvise in the various pentatonic positions. Or that he ultimately did end up teaching me how to play that hallowed song, banned from all Wayne's World guitar shops. But that would do a disservice to him, and the lessons I took away from that lonely, searching time in my life.

What he taught me was that the best guitarists in the world are dedicated to learning more than just their preferred genre. That they're ravenous for all forms of mastery of the instrument. That if you're going to shred the fretboard at 600bpm, you should also have an idea of how to compose melodies, and listen to the people who can make their crowds weep, or dance, or laugh.

If there's any testament to the impact that his lessons had on me, it would be that for my first public performance -- the middle school talent show when I was in 9th grade -- I didn't play Stairway to Heaven, but rather Classical Gas, by Mason Williams. It was a song I'd heard hundreds of times growing up. My parents were massive fans of Mannheim Steamroller and Chip Davis, and one of the albums we listened to on every single road trip was none other than the Mason Williams / Mannheim Steamroller collaboration, "Classical Gas." I had always assumed the song originated in that context, that it was this compendium of guitar, horns, and synthesizer, and that if I wanted to play it, I would somehow have to find someone to play the accompanying synth &amp; horn parts with me.

The idea that I could play the entire song myself, on guitar, was revolutionary.

I spent weeks learning it and nothing else. Some of my classmates took notice and started asking me to hang out. My fellow symphonic band members -- yes, I had taken my saxophone to Pennsylvania and continued in the band -- also noticed, and one of the jazz drummers invited me to start jamming with him during the off hours of class. Then, the school's resident guitarist, the kid who knew all the theory, could play all the scales and chords, was even class president, asked me to start jamming. He invited me over to his house, taught me how to change my strings, showed me all of his effects pedals, taught me about harmonic minor scales, which he was learning from his own instructor. Then he learned that I was planning to play Classical Gas for the talent show, and immediately suggested we should make a duet of it.

I was all in. Through guitar, I had gone from feeling like an isolated Southern bumpkin, to hanging out with some of the most popular kids in my grade, and the prospect of playing a duet my new friend in front of the entire school felt like a chance to truly establish myself and find some truer sense of belonging.

But, and there's always a but, I was struggling with the duet. I'd spent so much time learning the song on my own that I hadn't held myself to the rigors of making sure I played the song _in rhythm and time_ with the original. I could approximate it, but there were some parts that felt awkward to play as I had learned them, especially during some of the more energetic chord and key changes. I could never get it to sound exactly like Mason, and so I made my best guess and that guess became how I played the song. It was fundamentally ignorant of the meter and time signature, but because it _sounded_, melodically, like the original, I figured it was close enough. 

The problems with this approach came out most prominently when I tried to play the duet with my friend. He was less focused on the fingerstyle aspects of the song, which had completely captivated me, and more focused on the general feel of the melody and chords, which is something I've found to be a common trait of real guitarists. As a result, his rhythm and time were perfect, but when we played together I was constantly adding a beat here, missing a beat there, and generally throwing off the entire composition. My dexterity was excellent - I could hit notes quickly and precisely - but doing so with any adherence to four beats per measure was a level of mental effort that felt completely beyond me. In other words, I had fallen headlong into one of the most devastating of Great British Bake-Off pitfalls: I was all style and no substance.
